New draft: The function that changed my mind (#8)
sierisimo/publications: TheFunctionChangedMyMind/README-en.md

---
title: The Function that changed my mind
published: false

> description: How a single function show me a lot of kotlin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: How a single function showed me a lot of Kotlin
```

> tags: kotlin,functions,android,refactor

Reviewer 2: Add space after each comma

Author: I won't. It's not necessary for the tag system and in some poor designed tags systems it would cause errors. this is just metadata

cover_image:
series:
---

> When writting code we should always have a place for improvement. Improvement can present itself in different ways or forms. A proof of it is how in recent years the big attention to CI (_Continous Integration_) and CD (_Continous Delivery_) has grown. Same goes for new languages and technologies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When writting code, we should always have a place for improvement. Improvement can present itself in different ways. A proof of it is how in recent years the attention to CI (_Continuous Integration_) and CD (_Continuous Delivery_) has grown significantly. Same goes for new languages and technologies.
```

> When writting code, we should always have a place for improvement. Improvement can present itself in different ways. A proof of it is how in recent years the attention to CI (_Continuous Integration_) and CD (_Continuous Delivery_) has grown significantly. Same goes for new languages and technologies.

Reviewer 2: A proof about it, is the way the attention of CI and CD has significantly grown in recent years.

> But not all involve changing to a new language, technology or tool. Some of these improvements are simply changing how something works, adding tests, adding abstractions, changing patterns, etc. This is the case for the change I introduced on one of my projects.

Reviewer 2: Nevertheless, this doesn't involve changing to a new language, technology, nor tool. Some of these improvements are so simple as changing how something works, i. e. adding tests/abstractions, changing patterns, etc. This is how I have proceeded in several projects I have worked in.

> **Disclaimer**: If you know me in person or have been in a meetup with me presenting, there's a big chance you already heard me talking about this, even [on YouTube with the GDG Santo Domingo (in spanish)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0KoXxoPHV4o&feature=youtu.be) or Kotlin/Everywhere Guadalajara and Mexico City.

Reviewer 2: Whether you have talked with me in person, or have attended to one of my talks at meetups, it's likely, you already have heard me talking about it, even....

> **Another disclaimer**: This article is not about architecture –even when it's a hot topic in the Android community– or best practices or even about how to organize an Android Aplication, it's just about a set of changes that showed me some concepts of Kotlin. Also, I started this changes almost 3 years ago, by the point of publication of this article, probably the libraries from Google –like `core-ktx`– already have something similar or better. And just to be clear: None of the approaches discutted here is right or wrong, all the solutions depend on individual needs and individual reasons to choose them over the others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Another disclaimer**: This article is not about architecture –even when it's a hot topic in the Android community– or best practices or even about how to organize an Android Application. It's just about a set of changes that showed me some Kotlin concepts. Also, I started these changes almost 3 years ago, so by the time this article is published, the libraries from Google –like `core-ktx`– will probably already have something similar or better. And just to be clear: None of the approaches discussed here are right or wrong, all the solutions depend on individual needs and individual reasons to choose them over the others.
```

> ## But first… some Context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## But first… some _Context_
```

> **Another disclaimer**: This article is not about architecture –even when it's a hot topic in the Android community– or best practices or even about how to organize an Android Application. It's just about a set of changes that showed me some Kotlin concepts. Also, I started these changes almost 3 years ago, so by the time this article is published, the libraries from Google –like `core-ktx`– will probably already have something similar or better. And just to be clear: None of the approaches discussed here are right or wrong, all the solutions depend on individual needs and individual reasons to choose them over the others.

Reviewer 2: –even though it's a hot topic in the Android community –, best practices or even about how...

Also, I started to implement this aforementioned strategies almost 3 years ago, therefor by the time.... 

will probably being updated or improved.

And just to be clear: It's good to mention that the approaches mentioned in the following lines don't apply to all scenarios nor cases; the solutions mentioned in this article depend on scenarios or needs themselves, besides individual reasons...

> If you're an Android Developer or have worked with Android, probably you catch the pun intended in the joke, if not, let me explain you quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're an Android Developer or have worked with Android, you probably caught the pun intended by this title. If not, let me explain it to you quickly.
```

> In Android, everything happening on your application has a `Context` and to make some stuff work, you also need a `Context`. This is just a class that Android uses to give information and access to the app.

Reviewer 2: In Android development, everything happening on your application has a `Context` and to make some stuff work, you need to deal with a `Context` as well. This is no more than a class that Android uses to provide information and access to the app.

> One specific case is when you want to start a new `Activity` on your app. This means –in short– launching a new whole screen or launching an external application. To do this, you first create an `Intent` based on your `Context` and pass the `Actiity` class you want to start:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One specific case is when you want to start a new `Activity` on your app. This means –in short– launching a whole new screen or an external application. To do this, you first create an `Intent` based on your `Context` and pass the `Activity` class you want to start:
```

> One specific case is when you want to start a new `Activity` on your app. This means –in short– launching a whole new screen or an external application. To do this, you first create an `Intent` based on your `Context` and pass the `Activity` class you want to start:

Reviewer 2: One specific case arises at the time it's required to start a new `Activity` on your app. This means -succinctly- ...

In order to accomplish it, firstly you should create an `Intent` ... pass the `Activity` you would like to launch:

```kotlin
val myIntent = Intent(context, MyNextActivity::class.java)
```

Then you can start `MyNextActivity` from another `Activity` simply using this intent: `startActivity(myIntent)`

> If your application relays on activities for showing different sections/views of your application then probably you will end with a lot of this calls distributed around. In some different variants, but all of them with the same structure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your application relays on activities for showing different sections/views of your application then probably you will end with a lot of these calls distributed around. In some different variants, but all of them with the same structure:
```

> If your application relays on activities for showing different sections/views of your application then probably you will end with a lot of these calls distributed around. In some different variants, but all of them with the same structure:

Reviewer 2: //Relays is not relies, keep that in mind

If your application relies on activities for showing varied sections or views of your application, then probably you will end **up** with a lot of these calls distributed around. All of them with the same structure yet with several variants, such as:

```kotlin
val someIntent = Intent(context, SomeActivity::class.java)
//Do stuff with the intent
startActivity(someIntent)

//And if you don't do things with the intent and you are in an activity
startActivity(
    Intent(this, MyNextActivity::class.java)
)
```

## My first problem

> To be honest, there is no problem with this code. Not at all. But I have seen this happening in a lot of applications, you start having these calls distributed around without control, then you suddenly have 2 or 3 places doing the same, setting the same intent with a different variable name but same parameters and then doing the same call. To solve these, most people usually do one of two things:

Reviewer 2: ...a lot of applications, firstly you have these calls distributed around without messed around, then you suddenly have 2 or 3 repetitions of the same work in different places...

...the same call. To overcome these...

> 1. Wrap it around a single method for each case

Reviewer 2: Wrap it around a single method for each case **.**

Author: I know you hate it, but consistency is the real MVP. No dot at the end of list items.

> 2. Put all under a single class/object and just pass needed parameters for repeated cases

Reviewer 2: 2. Put all under a single class/object and just pass needed parameters for repeated cases **.**

This means, for case 1:

```kotlin
/** Inside your class that will have the calls **/
fun startNext() {
    startActivity(
        Intent(this, MyNextActivity::class.java)
    )
}

fun startSome() {
    val someIntent = Intent(this, SomeActivity::class.java)
    //Do things with intent
    startActivity(someIntent)
}
```

And for case 2:

```kotlin
object AppRouter {
    fun startNext(context: Context) {
        startActivity(
            Intent(context, MyNextActivity::class.java)
        )
    }

    fun startSome(context: Context) {
        val someIntent = Intent(context, SomeActivity::class.java)
        //Do things with intent
        startActivity(someIntent)
    }
}
```

> You can add different layers of complexity but this is the base for most solutions: **have a single point for launching/starting new activities**. In my case I always ended having case 1 all around. Having functions here and there seemed like a good solution, until I ended with 120 functions doing almost the same all around, which is not bad but seeing that `::class.java` even inside of different methods really bother me plus seeing 3 or 4 functions inside the same class with almost the same body also feels wrong.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add different layers of complexity but this is the base for most solutions: **have a single point for launching/starting new activities**. In my case, I always ended having case 1 all around. Having functions here and there seemed like a good solution, until I ended with 120 functions doing almost the same all around, which is not bad, but seeing that `::class.java` even inside of different methods really bothered me. Plus, seeing 3 or 4 functions inside the same class with almost the same body also feels wrong.
```

> You can add different layers of complexity but this is the base for most solutions: **have a single point for launching/starting new activities**. In my case, I always ended having case 1 all around. Having functions here and there seemed like a good solution, until I ended with 120 functions doing almost the same all around, which is not bad, but seeing that `::class.java` even inside of different methods really bothered me. Plus, seeing 3 or 4 functions inside the same class with almost the same body also feels wrong.

Reviewer 2: You can add several layers of complexity, but this is the base for most solutions:

In my case, I always ended **up** with 120...

```kotlin
fun startNext(context: Context) {
    launchActivity(context, MyNextActivity::class.java)
}

fun startSome(context: Context) {
    launchActivity(context, SomeActivity::class.java)
}
```

And seeing this… well, the initial stuff that triggered me was the whole `::class.java` and is still present, this is not a great improvement…

## Inheritance

Well, having this **global function** also feels kind of wrong, and almost all the places using the function will be some kind of `Activity`. Maybe we can make the function available through inheritance…

```kotlin
open class BaseLaunchActivity: Activity() {
    fun <T> launchActivity(Class<T> clazz) {
        val intent = Intent(this, clazz)
        startActivity(intent)
    }
}

//And then…
class MyActivity : BaseLaunchActivity() {
    fun onSomeClick() {
        launchActivity(SomeActivity::class.java)
    }
}
```

Cool! We got rid of one parameter, we hide where the magic is happening and made the function available to most of the parts using it.

But wait… _most_? We want **all**, not _most_… also this has other issues:

> 1. Is not always possible to inherit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It is not always possible to inherit
```

2. Not all the classes in need of the code will be a kind of `Activity`

> 3. When some class has access to `Activity` it will need to cast in an ugly way

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. When some class has access to `Activity` it will need to be cast in an ugly way
```

> 4. The `::class.java` is still present –ugh, it's ugly–

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. `::class.java` is still present –ugh, it's ugly!
```

    fun <T> launchActivity(Class<T> clazz) {
        val intent = Intent(launcherContext, clazz)
        startActivity(intent)
    }
}
```

But now every class that needs this function will need to both:

1. Implement the interface
2. Give a value to the `launcherContext` property

That's boring!!

What about a single extension function to remove the dependency over the property?

```kotlin
fun <T> Context.launchActivity(Class<T> clazz) {
    val intent = Intent(this, clazz)
    startActivity(intent)
}
```

That's actually cool!

Now whatever `Context` existing around can simply invoke this function without issues, we no longer need wrapper functions but… the `::class.java` has not moved. Arghhh… that thing is making our code look ugly…

And we have a bigger problem… turns out that for this small function, the Kotlin compiler will generate some bytecode that once existing in the JVM will look aproximately –on java– like this:

```java
public final class ContextExtensions {
    public static final void launchActivity(@NotNull Context context, @NotNull Class clazz) {
        Intent intent = new Intent(context, clazz);
        startActivity(intent);
    }
}
```

> This is not bad but is a caveat of having Kotlin extension functions and… well, if is only to make things readable, we are not making too much progress, we only removed 1 line of code from our original block of code. What can save us from actually having this on the bytecode and still adding readability to our codebase?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is not bad but is a caveat of having Kotlin extension functions and… well, if it is only to make things readable, we are not making too much progress: we only removed 1 line of code from our original block of code. What can save us from actually having this on the bytecode and still adding readability to our codebase?
```

## INLINE

Adding a single reserved word to our function will make everything cool on the bytecode:

```kotlin
inline fun <T> Context.launchActivity(Class<T> clazz) {
    val intent = Intent(this, clazz)
    startActivity(intent)
}
```

But if you are writting this on **AndroidStudio** or **IntelliJ** probably you'll notice a warning explaining that there's no actual optimization from _inlining_ this function. And that's true, `inline` works as an **_SMART-COPY-PASTE_** which mean it will do magic on compile time to paste the body of your function where is being called with actual params and stuff.

Talking about params… what about the `Intent`? We usually pass information between activities using the `Intent` right? With the current approach is not possible to pass any parameter… let's fix that first and we then can check the warning from the `inline`.

## Lambda with reciever

> Because we don't want to increment the size of our parameter list, because the types of parameters can grow and because we don't want to have multiple wrapper functions just for the parameters, we need to find a way to "_configure_" or `Intent` _on demand_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we don't want to increment the size of our parameter list, because the types of parameters can grow and because we don't want to have multiple wrapper functions just for the parameters, we need to find a way to "_configure_" our `Intent` _on demand_.
```

The _lambda with reciever_ is one way to fix this. Adding this parameter to our function we can allow each caller to configure during execution of our function the `Intent` and still keep things readable:

```kotlin
inline fun <T> Context.launchActivity(Class<T> clazz, confBlock: Intent.() -> Unit) {
    val intent = Intent(this, clazz)
    intent.confBlock()
    startActivity(intent)
}
```

> Adding this last parameter we are saying that our function can take a lambda that will execute in the scope of an `Intent` and can use properties and methods from the `Intent`. This lambda is later used to setup our `Intent` and finally we start the activity with the already configured `Intent`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding this last parameter we are saying that our function can take a lambda that will execute in the scope of an `Intent` and can use properties and methods from the `Intent` object. This lambda is later used to set up our `Intent` and finally we start the activity with the already configured `Intent`.
```

This change allows the execution to be something like:

```kotlin
fun onSomeInteraction() {
    launchActivity(SomeActivity::class.java) {
        putExtra(MY_KEY, myValue)
        putExtra(SOME_KEY, someValue)
    }
}
```

Also, the warning about `inline` disappears with these changes as the optimization now makes sense. In compile time, the compiler will take the call to our function and replace it with the actual body of the function and replacing the lambda with a local variable. This will increase a little bit the size of our bytecode but gave us more readability for usages.

The bytecode for this call on Java will look something like:

```java
public void onSomeInteraction() {
    Intent intent = new Intent(this, SomeActivity.class);
    intent.putExtra(MY_KEY, myValue);
    intent.putExtra(SOME_KEY, someValue);
    startActivity(intent);
}
```

As you can see, no reference to external classes, no calls to external functions, all living there. This is a good thing, as the code stays simple while coding and has the real meaning when executing.

> But still… while codign the `::class.java` is present. Why I have been complaining about this if is something present in Kotlin? Well, the main reason is because this operator and class is not nice, it's quite ugly and also can be confusing. There are more than one way to obtain a `Class<T>` from a class and this one is the easier one. There's a chance for erro using the other ones and they are verbose, not what we are trying to avoid here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But still… while coding, the `::class.java` is present. Why have I been complaining about this if it is something present in Kotlin? Well, the main reason is because this operator and class is not nice, it's quite ugly and also can be confusing. There is more than one way to obtain a `Class<T>` from a class and this one is the easier one. There's a chance for error using the other ones and they are verbose, not what we are trying to avoid here.
```

```kotlin
inline fun <reified Ty> Context.launchActivity(Class<T> clazz, confBlock: Intent.() -> Unit) {
    val intent = Intent(this, clazz)
    intent.confBlock()
    startActivity(intent)
}
```

Adding this word will means that for every single call of our function, when inlining, the compiler will use the actual type instead of a generic or a super type in the caller. This small change allows us to use the generic inside of our function as a real type, then we can remove the first parameter and replace with the real type:

```kotlin
inline fun <reified T> Context.launchActivity(confBlock: Intent.() -> Unit) {
    val intent = Intent(this, T::class.java)
    intent.confBlock()
    startActivity(intent)
}
```

Now all the calls to this function can be as clean as:

```kotlin
launchActivity<SomeActivity> {
    putExtra(MY_KEY, myValue)
}

launchActivity<MyNextActivity> {}
```

Some final touches to the signature will make the function even safer and even cooler when being called:

1. Make `T` have a constraint to `Activity` in a way only classes that extend from `Activity` are allowed

> 2. Add a default value to the _lambda with reciever_ to allow calls with empty configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Add a default value to the _lambda with receiver_ to allow calls with an empty configuration
```

```kotlin
inline fun <reified T: Activity> Context.launchActivity(confBlock: Intent.() -> Unit = {}) {
    ...
}
```

> Now our function is cooler than ever, won't add too much to the final bytecode and also will make our code more readable. Wow! We traveled a long way doing a lot of changes to a single piece of code to make things cooler, but not just that, now other people developing along with us can benefit from this improvement as they can simply call our function without having to worry how it works. I have seen even people adding animations, making a way to hold results and transforming data using this kind of functions/approaches. Writting idiomatic Kotlin actually makes you think and develop different and cooler!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now our function is cooler than ever, won't add too much to the final bytecode and also will make our code more readable. Wow! We traveled a long way doing a lot of changes to a single piece of code to make things cooler, but not just that, now other people developing along with us can benefit from this improvement as they can simply call our function without having to worry how it works. I have seen even people adding animations, making a way to hold results and transforming data using these kind of functions/approaches. Writing idiomatic Kotlin actually makes you think and develop different and cooler!
```

## Conlusion

> We can apply this kind of approch by steps or go directly to other functions on our codebase, one example is the usage of `SharedPreferences` and making the _edition_ do an _auto-apply_ "magically" using the lambda with reciever. We can create ways to configure more stuff in less steps and this will make our writting of code improving as we are adding tools to our set of _already-vaste_ set of functions and tools on kotlin. Thinking on what is repeated or what can be improved allows us –developers– to discover new worlds and make things cooler and sharper. Don't be scared of the change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can apply this kind of approch by steps or go directly to other functions on our codebase, one example is the usage of `SharedPreferences` and making the _edition_ do an _auto-apply_ "magically" using the lambda with receiver. We can create ways to configure more stuff in less steps and this will make our writing of code improve as we will be adding tools to our _already-vast_ set of functions and tools on Kotlin. Thinking about what is repeated or can be improved allows us –the developers– to discover new worlds and make things cooler and sharper. Don't be scared of change.
```
